readme.adoc, before:

= A Sample Java Web-Application
:experimental:

image:https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook/workflows/Build%20Maven%20artifacts/badge.svg["Build Status", link="https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook/actions?query=workflow%3A%22Build+Maven+artifacts%22"]
image:https://img.shields.io/badge/Gitpod-ready--to--code-908a85?logo=gitpod["Gitpod ready-to-code", link="https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook"]

Purpose of this sample project is to make students familiar with basic technologies they're going to use during the Software Engineering Lab at Technical University of Dresden.

== Quickstart

=== Using GitPod

http://gitpod.io/[GitPod] is a cloud IDE that allows you to work with a project right from your browser:

1. Click https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook[this link] to open the project in GitPod.
2. Wait for the build to finish (see progress in the console view).
3. Once the website opens in the embedded preview browser, the project is ready to be worked with. 
You might need to click on the __Open in browser__ button besides the URL in the embededed preview browser.

=== Local machine

NOTE: Working on your local machine requires Java 21, and a recent Git (2.21 or better preferred) to be available on
your machine.
If you miss any of those go through the steps described in <<Prerequisites>>.
Also, note that you have to run `mvnw.cmd` instead of `./mvnw` if you run Windows by accident.

[source, shell]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook
$ cd guestbook
$ ./mvnw clean package
$ ./mvnw spring-boot:run
----

After that point your browser to `http://localhost:8080`.
Note that Spring Boot creates a default user `user` with a random password printed to the console when the application starts, as described in the https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#boot-features-security[Spring Boot reference docs].

== Prerequisites

=== Java 21

https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=21[Download] the binaries, install.
Make sure the console shows something like this:

[source, bash]
----
$ java -version
openjdk version "21.0.3" 2024-04-16 LTS
OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-21.0.3+9 (build 21.0.3+9-LTS)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-21.0.3+9 (build 21.0.3+9-LTS, mixed mode, sharing)

----

Make sure that the wrapped Maven picks up the same JDK version and that the following command shows similar output
(Windows Example):

[source, bash]
----
$ .\mvnw.cmd --version
Apache Maven 3.8.6 (84538c9988a25aec085021c365c560670ad80f63)
Maven home: C:\Users\USER\.m2\wrapper\dists\apache-maven-3.8.6-bin\67568434\apache-maven-3.8.6
Java version: 21.0.3, vendor: Eclipse Adoptium, runtime: C:\PATH\TO\JDK\jdk-21.0.3.9-hotspot
Default locale: de_DE, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "windows 11", version: "10.0", arch: "amd64", family: "windows"
----

=== Git

https://git-scm.com/download[Download] the binaries, run the installer. Verify the command line shows something like this after install:

[source, bash]
----
$ git --version
git version 2.33.0
----

== IDE Setup

=== Eclipse

Grab the latest https://spring.io/tools[Spring Tool Suite] (plain Eclipse should work as well), run installer or unzip and run it.

Select menu:File[Import], select menu:Maven[Existing Maven Projects], select the folder you checked the project out into and hit btn:[Finish]. This will import the project into your workspace.

In the Console view you might wanna click the btn:[Open Console] button and select Maven Console to see that Maven is downloading dependencies, sources and Javadocs.

=== IntelliJ

Grab the latest https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/[IntelliJ IDEA IDE] (both Community Edition and Ultimate Edition will work), install it according to the instructions on their website and run it.

=== Open from local disk
From the Welcome Screen, select btn:[Open]. Otherwise, if you've already opened another project, you'll need to select menu:File[Open…].
Now, navigate to the folder you checked the project out into (it should contain `pom.xml`), select it and hit btn:[Open].
When asked whether to trust and open the Maven project, proceed with btn:[Trust Project].

=== Open from VCS
If you want to clone the project from GitHub, you can do so directly from IntelliJ IDEA. T
From the Welcome Screen, select btn:[Get from VCS]. Otherwise, if you've already opened another project, you'll need to select menu:File[New​][Project from Version Control…​].
Paste the URL `https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook' into the URL field, select a directory to clone the project into and hit btn:[Clone].
When asked whether to open the project, proceed with btn:[Yes].

Now you have to wait a bit while IntelliJ and Maven work on importing the project, which includes downloading all required dependencies from the internet.
All IDE activities are displayed in the status bar.

== Technology stack

This sample application is build on top of the following technologies:

=== Spring Boot

Rapid application development framework based on Spring (see below).

- https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle[Reference documentation]
- https://spring.io/guides[Getting started guides]
- https://projects.spring.io/spring-boot[Project home]

=== Spring Framework

The de-facto standard Java application framework.

- https://spring.io/guides[Getting started guides]
- https://projects.spring.io/spring-framework[Project home]

=== Spring Data JPA

Spring module to easily build data access layers using JPA 2.2 (Jakarta Persistence API).

- https://spring.io/guides?filter=jpa[Getting started guides]
- https://projects.spring.io/spring-data-jpa[Project home]

=== Thymeleaf

Library to build HTML web views using natural templating.

- https://spring.io/guides/gs/serving-web-content[Getting stared guide]
- https://www.thymeleaf.org/doc/tutorials/3.0/usingthymeleaf.html[Tutorial]

=== Semantic UI and Bootstrap

CSS frameworks to build responsive web applications.

- https://semantic-ui.com[Semantic UI]
- https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/getting-started/introduction/[Bootstrap-5-Documentation]

=== HTMX

Library to build dynamic web applications using HTML and JavaScript (AJAX).

- https://htmx.org[Overview]
- https://htmx.org/docs[Tutorial-Documentation]
- Special Thymeleaf dialect to integrate HTMX:
https://github.com/wimdeblauwe/htmx-spring-boot[Github]

Commit message:

Adapt to hochschule merseburg context

readme.adoc, after:

= A Sample Java Web-Application
:experimental:

image:https://github.com/HOME-programming-pub/guestbook/workflows/Build%20Maven%20artifacts/badge.svg["Build Status", link="https://github.com/HOME-programming-pub/guestbook/actions?query=workflow%3A%22Build+Maven+artifacts%22"]
image:https://img.shields.io/badge/Gitpod-ready--to--code-908a85?logo=gitpod["Gitpod ready-to-code", link="https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/HOME-programming-pub/guestbook"]

Purpose of this sample project is to make students familiar with basic technologies they're going to use during the Software Engineering Lab at Technical University of Dresden.

This project is a fork of https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook. It is used to make students familiar with basic technologies they’re going to use during the Software Engineering Lab at Technical University of Dresden.

At Hochschule Merseburg, this project is used for exactly the same purpose in the Software-Project (Programmierung 3/ Anwendungsprogrammierung).


== Quickstart

=== Using GitPod

http://gitpod.io/[GitPod] is a cloud IDE that allows you to work with a project right from your browser:

1. Click https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/HOME-programming-pub/guestbook[this link] to open the project in GitPod.
2. Wait for the build to finish (see progress in the console view).
3. Once the website opens in the embedded preview browser, the project is ready to be worked with. 
You might need to click on the __Open in browser__ button besides the URL in the embededed preview browser.

=== Local machine

NOTE: Working on your local machine requires Java 21, and a recent Git (2.21 or better preferred) to be available on
your machine.
If you miss any of those go through the steps described in <<Prerequisites>>.
Also, note that you have to run `mvnw.cmd` instead of `./mvnw` if you run Windows by accident.

[source, shell]
----
$ git clone https://github.com/HOME-programming-pub/guestbook
$ cd guestbook
$ ./mvnw clean package
$ ./mvnw spring-boot:run
----

After that point your browser to `http://localhost:8080`.
Note that Spring Boot creates a default user `user` with a random password printed to the console when the application starts, as described in the https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#boot-features-security[Spring Boot reference docs].

== Prerequisites

=== Java 21

https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=21[Download] the binaries, install.
Make sure the console shows something like this:

[source, bash]
----
$ java -version
openjdk version "21.0.3" 2024-04-16 LTS
OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-21.0.3+9 (build 21.0.3+9-LTS)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-21.0.3+9 (build 21.0.3+9-LTS, mixed mode, sharing)

----

Make sure that the wrapped Maven picks up the same JDK version and that the following command shows similar output
(Windows Example):

[source, bash]
----
$ .\mvnw.cmd --version
Apache Maven 3.8.6 (84538c9988a25aec085021c365c560670ad80f63)
Maven home: C:\Users\USER\.m2\wrapper\dists\apache-maven-3.8.6-bin\67568434\apache-maven-3.8.6
Java version: 21.0.3, vendor: Eclipse Adoptium, runtime: C:\PATH\TO\JDK\jdk-21.0.3.9-hotspot
Default locale: de_DE, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "windows 11", version: "10.0", arch: "amd64", family: "windows"
----

=== Git

https://git-scm.com/download[Download] the binaries, run the installer. Verify the command line shows something like this after install:

[source, bash]
----
$ git --version
git version 2.33.0
----

== IDE Setup

=== Eclipse

Grab the latest https://spring.io/tools[Spring Tool Suite] (plain Eclipse should work as well), run installer or unzip and run it.

Select menu:File[Import], select menu:Maven[Existing Maven Projects], select the folder you checked the project out into and hit btn:[Finish]. This will import the project into your workspace.

In the Console view you might wanna click the btn:[Open Console] button and select Maven Console to see that Maven is downloading dependencies, sources and Javadocs.

=== IntelliJ

Grab the latest https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/[IntelliJ IDEA IDE] (both Community Edition and Ultimate Edition will work), install it according to the instructions on their website and run it.

=== Open from local disk
From the Welcome Screen, select btn:[Open]. Otherwise, if you've already opened another project, you'll need to select menu:File[Open…].
Now, navigate to the folder you checked the project out into (it should contain `pom.xml`), select it and hit btn:[Open].
When asked whether to trust and open the Maven project, proceed with btn:[Trust Project].

=== Open from VCS
If you want to clone the project from GitHub, you can do so directly from IntelliJ IDEA. T
From the Welcome Screen, select btn:[Get from VCS]. Otherwise, if you've already opened another project, you'll need to select menu:File[New​][Project from Version Control…​].
Paste the URL `https://github.com/st-tu-dresden/guestbook' into the URL field, select a directory to clone the project into and hit btn:[Clone].
When asked whether to open the project, proceed with btn:[Yes].

Now you have to wait a bit while IntelliJ and Maven work on importing the project, which includes downloading all required dependencies from the internet.
All IDE activities are displayed in the status bar.

== Technology stack

This sample application is build on top of the following technologies:

=== Spring Boot

Rapid application development framework based on Spring (see below).

- https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle[Reference documentation]
- https://spring.io/guides[Getting started guides]
- https://projects.spring.io/spring-boot[Project home]

=== Spring Framework

The de-facto standard Java application framework.

- https://spring.io/guides[Getting started guides]
- https://projects.spring.io/spring-framework[Project home]

=== Spring Data JPA

Spring module to easily build data access layers using JPA 2.2 (Jakarta Persistence API).

- https://spring.io/guides?filter=jpa[Getting started guides]
- https://projects.spring.io/spring-data-jpa[Project home]

=== Thymeleaf

Library to build HTML web views using natural templating.

- https://spring.io/guides/gs/serving-web-content[Getting stared guide]
- https://www.thymeleaf.org/doc/tutorials/3.0/usingthymeleaf.html[Tutorial]

=== Semantic UI and Bootstrap

CSS frameworks to build responsive web applications.

- https://semantic-ui.com[Semantic UI]
- https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/getting-started/introduction/[Bootstrap-5-Documentation]

=== HTMX

Library to build dynamic web applications using HTML and JavaScript (AJAX).

- https://htmx.org[Overview]
- https://htmx.org/docs[Tutorial-Documentation]
- Special Thymeleaf dialect to integrate HTMX:
https://github.com/wimdeblauwe/htmx-spring-boot[Github]
